README.md, before:

# Suspend for Palestine ECI

This repository serves as a public draft of the "**Suspension of Trade Provisions of EU-Israel Association Agreement for Essential Elements Breach**" [European Citizens' Initiative](https://citizens-initiative.europa.eu/) (ECI). 

An ECI enables at least one million EU citizens from at least seven different EU member states to invite the [European Commission](https://commission.europa.eu/) to propose legislation on matters where the EU has competence to legislate.

This ECI calls for temporary suspension of trade and commercial provisions of the [Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement with Israel](https://eeas.europa.eu/archives/delegations/israel/documents/eu_israel/asso_agree_en.pdf) based on material breach of Article 2's essential elements provision requiring respect for human rights. The measure falls under Common Commercial Policy competence (Article 207 TFEU), requiring qualified majority voting.

## Key Documents

- [Draft Legal Act](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/legal-act/draft-legal-act.md)
- [Objectives](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/objectives.md)
- [Annex - Subject, Objectives and Background](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/annex.md)
- [Additional Information](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/additional-information/additional-information.md)

**ECI Registration URL:** https://register.eci.ec.europa.eu/organisers/#/wizard/proposed

## Strategy Overview

This ECI uses a focused approach designed for maximum impact and feasibility:

- **Narrow scope:** Suspend only trade provisions while maintaining humanitarian aid and cooperation
- **Easier passage:** Use trade law (Article 207 TFEU) requiring only qualified majority (15/27 countries), avoiding single-country vetoes
- **Comprehensive conditions:** Beyond ceasefire, require measurable humanitarian access, settlement halt, and international law compliance
- **Long-term framework:** Establish precedent that trade benefits depend on human rights respect

This strategy leverages EU trade policy—where the EU is strongest and unity is easier—rather than foreign policy where unanimity requirements enable blocking.

## Current EU Context

**May 2025 Breakthrough:** On May 20, 2025, [17 of 27 EU member states voted](https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2025/05/20/eu-to-review-its-trade-and-cooperation-with-israel-over-gaza-offensive) to review Article 2 of the EU-Israel Association Agreement, assessing Israel's compliance with human rights obligations. This represents the first official EU institutional step toward potential suspension.

**June 2025 Official Assessment:** The EU Special Representative for Human Rights issued an official assessment on June 20, 2025, confirming "indications that Israel would be in breach of its human rights obligations under Article 2." This institutional validation documents systematic violations including collective punishment, indiscriminate attacks, systematic hospital targeting, mass displacement, and settlement expansion - strengthening the legal case for commercial policy measures.

**The Gap This ECI Fills:** While the institutional review and official assessment validate Article 2 violations, they face critical limitations:
- **No concrete timeline** for action beyond endless consultations
- **Political resistance** already emerging, with officials stating suspension is ["unlikely" due to regional conflicts](https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2025/06/18/exclusive-iran-conflict-to-derail-eu-review-of-israeli-association-agreement)
- **Lack of specific restoration conditions** and measurable benchmarks
- **Risk of unanimity requirements** if treated as foreign policy rather than commercial policy

**This ECI's Strategic Advantage:** Our initiative provides what the institutional process lacks:
- **Direct citizen mandate** requiring Commission response within legal deadlines
- **Commercial Policy framework** (Article 207 TFEU) ensuring qualified majority voting
- **Precise restoration conditions** with quantitative metrics (500 trucks daily, settlement halt verification, etc.)
- **Legal certainty** through established precedent (Belarus 2012, Myanmar sanctions)

The institutional review and official assessment validate concerns about Article 2 violations while demonstrating the need for citizen pressure to ensure concrete action. This ECI converts growing institutional momentum and official documentation into binding commercial policy measures, ensuring recognition translates into effective trade conditionality enforcement.

## Legal Framework

**Primary Authority:** Article 60 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties permits suspension when one party materially breaches essential treaty provisions. Article 2 of the EU-Israel Association Agreement establishes respect for human rights as an "essential element" conditioning all trade benefits.

**EU Competence:** [Article 207 TFEU](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A12012E%2FTXT) grants EU exclusive competence over Common Commercial Policy, including trade agreement suspension through qualified majority voting.

**International Obligations:** ICJ provisional measures of 26 January 2024 create binding obligations under the Genocide Convention for third-party States to prevent genocide using available means, including commercial policy instruments.

**Established Precedent:** EU suspended trade provisions with Belarus (2012) under Common Commercial Policy for essential elements violations, demonstrating consistent legal practice.

## Suspension Conditions

The suspension of trade provisions would remain until verified compliance with:

- (a) Ceasefire implementation verified by UN monitoring bodies
- (b) Humanitarian access restored to pre-October 2023 levels (minimum 500 trucks daily)
- (c) Geneva Conventions compliance verified by ICRC
- (d) Settlement construction halt verified per UNSC Resolution 2334
- (e) Movement restrictions removal verified by UN Special Rapporteur

All conditions include precise, measurable metrics verified by established international monitoring bodies.

## Implementation Path

**Qualified Majority Voting:** Following ECI validation with **1 million signatures** across **seven member states**, the [Council](https://www.consilium.europa.eu/) decides using **55% of member states** (15 out of 27) representing **65% of EU population** under Common Commercial Policy procedures.

**Legal Basis:** Article 207 TFEU (Common Commercial Policy) ensures qualified majority voting applies, not unanimity.

## Proportionality

The suspension targets only trade and commercial provisions (Titles II-IV of the Agreement) while maintaining:
- Humanitarian cooperation and assistance
- Consular and diplomatic relations  
- Medical cooperation and emergency assistance
- Academic and scientific cooperation
- Existing contractual obligations

Clear restoration conditions with quantitative benchmarks ensure the measure serves as commercial policy instrument encouraging compliance with agreement conditionality.

## Character Limit Validation

This ECI must comply with strict character limits for submission:
- **Objectives:** Maximum 1,100 characters (without spaces)
- **Annex:** Maximum 5,000 characters (without spaces)

### Check Character Limits Locally

To verify compliance before submitting:

```bash
# Make script executable (first time only)
chmod +x scripts/check-character-limits.js

# Run the validation script
node scripts/check-character-limits.js
```

### Automated Validation

Character limits are automatically checked on:
- ✅ Pull requests modifying `objectives.md` or `annex.md`
- ✅ Pushes to main branch
- ❌ Builds will fail if limits are exceeded

## How to Contribute

We welcome contributions to improve this ECI. Please follow these contribution procedures:

- Create an [issue](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/issues)
- Create a branch from this issue (from main branch)
- Fetch locally
- Edit files
- Run character limit check
- Commit changes
- Push to repository
- Create [pull request](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/pulls)
- Request review

**Note:** Pull requests that exceed character limits will automatically fail CI checks.

## Join as ECI Organiser

If you wish to join as an ECI organiser, please review [this document](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/organisers.md) for requirements and procedures.

## Repository Maintenance

This repository is maintained by [Julien Béranger](https://github.com/julienbrg). For direct communication, you may reach out via:

- [Farcaster](https://warpcast.com/julien-)
- [Element](https://matrix.to/#/@julienbrg:matrix.org)
- [Status](https://status.app/u/iwSACggKBkp1bGllbsOwIwSACggKBkp1bGllbs=#zQ3shmh1sbvE6qrGotuyNQB22XU5jTrZ2HFC8bA56d5kTS2fy)
- [Telegram](https://t.me/julienbrg)
- [Twitter](https://twitter.com/julienbrg)
- [Discord](https://discordapp.com/users/julienbrg)
- [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/julienberanger/)

## License

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Commit message:

Enhance Strategy Overview: Clarify qualified majority voting advantage (#20)
ediit strat overview

README.md, after:

# Suspend for Palestine ECI

This repository serves as a public draft of the "**Suspension of Trade Provisions of EU-Israel Association Agreement for Essential Elements Breach**" [European Citizens' Initiative](https://citizens-initiative.europa.eu/) (ECI). 

An ECI enables at least one million EU citizens from at least seven different EU member states to invite the [European Commission](https://commission.europa.eu/) to propose legislation on matters where the EU has competence to legislate.

This ECI calls for temporary suspension of trade and commercial provisions of the [Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement with Israel](https://eeas.europa.eu/archives/delegations/israel/documents/eu_israel/asso_agree_en.pdf) based on material breach of Article 2's essential elements provision requiring respect for human rights. The measure falls under Common Commercial Policy competence (Article 207 TFEU), requiring qualified majority voting.

## Key Documents

- [Draft Legal Act](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/legal-act/draft-legal-act.md)
- [Objectives](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/objectives.md)
- [Annex - Subject, Objectives and Background](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/annex.md)
- [Additional Information](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/additional-information/additional-information.md)

**ECI Registration URL:** https://register.eci.ec.europa.eu/organisers/#/wizard/proposed

## Strategy Overview

This ECI uses a focused approach designed for maximum impact and feasibility:

- **Narrow scope:** Suspend only trade provisions while maintaining humanitarian aid and cooperation
- **Bypasses unanimity trap:** Use Article 207 TFEU (Common Commercial Policy) requiring only **qualified majority voting** (15/27 countries representing 65% of EU population) instead of the **unanimity requirement** that governs foreign policy
- **Prevents single-country vetoes:** Unlike foreign policy decisions where any one member state can block action, trade policy decisions cannot be vetoed by individual countries
- **Comprehensive conditions:** Beyond ceasefire, require measurable humanitarian access, settlement halt, and international law compliance  
- **Long-term framework:** Establish precedent that trade benefits depend on human rights respect

This strategy leverages EU trade policy—where the EU is strongest and political unity is easier to achieve—rather than foreign policy where unanimity requirements have repeatedly enabled blocking by individual member states.

## Current EU Context

**May 2025 Breakthrough:** On May 20, 2025, [17 of 27 EU member states voted](https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2025/05/20/eu-to-review-its-trade-and-cooperation-with-israel-over-gaza-offensive) to review Article 2 of the EU-Israel Association Agreement, assessing Israel's compliance with human rights obligations. This represents the first official EU institutional step toward potential suspension.

**June 2025 Official Assessment:** The EU Special Representative for Human Rights issued an official assessment on June 20, 2025, confirming "indications that Israel would be in breach of its human rights obligations under Article 2." This institutional validation documents systematic violations including collective punishment, indiscriminate attacks, systematic hospital targeting, mass displacement, and settlement expansion - strengthening the legal case for commercial policy measures.

**The Gap This ECI Fills:** While the institutional review and official assessment validate Article 2 violations, they face critical limitations:
- **No concrete timeline** for action beyond endless consultations
- **Political resistance** already emerging, with officials stating suspension is ["unlikely" due to regional conflicts](https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2025/06/18/exclusive-iran-conflict-to-derail-eu-review-of-israeli-association-agreement)
- **Lack of specific restoration conditions** and measurable benchmarks
- **Risk of unanimity requirements** if treated as foreign policy rather than commercial policy

**This ECI's Strategic Advantage:** Our initiative provides what the institutional process lacks:
- **Direct citizen mandate** requiring Commission response within legal deadlines
- **Commercial Policy framework** (Article 207 TFEU) ensuring qualified majority voting
- **Precise restoration conditions** with quantitative metrics (500 trucks daily, settlement halt verification, etc.)
- **Legal certainty** through established precedent (Belarus 2012, Myanmar sanctions)

The institutional review and official assessment validate concerns about Article 2 violations while demonstrating the need for citizen pressure to ensure concrete action. This ECI converts growing institutional momentum and official documentation into binding commercial policy measures, ensuring recognition translates into effective trade conditionality enforcement.

## Legal Framework

**Primary Authority:** Article 60 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties permits suspension when one party materially breaches essential treaty provisions. Article 2 of the EU-Israel Association Agreement establishes respect for human rights as an "essential element" conditioning all trade benefits.

**EU Competence:** [Article 207 TFEU](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A12012E%2FTXT) grants EU exclusive competence over Common Commercial Policy, including trade agreement suspension through qualified majority voting.

**International Obligations:** ICJ provisional measures of 26 January 2024 create binding obligations under the Genocide Convention for third-party States to prevent genocide using available means, including commercial policy instruments.

**Established Precedent:** EU suspended trade provisions with Belarus (2012) under Common Commercial Policy for essential elements violations, demonstrating consistent legal practice.

## Suspension Conditions

The suspension of trade provisions would remain until verified compliance with:

- (a) Ceasefire implementation verified by UN monitoring bodies
- (b) Humanitarian access restored to pre-October 2023 levels (minimum 500 trucks daily)
- (c) Geneva Conventions compliance verified by ICRC
- (d) Settlement construction halt verified per UNSC Resolution 2334
- (e) Movement restrictions removal verified by UN Special Rapporteur

All conditions include precise, measurable metrics verified by established international monitoring bodies.

## Implementation Path

**Qualified Majority Voting:** Following ECI validation with **1 million signatures** across **seven member states**, the [Council](https://www.consilium.europa.eu/) decides using **55% of member states** (15 out of 27) representing **65% of EU population** under Common Commercial Policy procedures.

**Legal Basis:** Article 207 TFEU (Common Commercial Policy) ensures qualified majority voting applies, not unanimity.

## Proportionality

The suspension targets only trade and commercial provisions (Titles II-IV of the Agreement) while maintaining:
- Humanitarian cooperation and assistance
- Consular and diplomatic relations  
- Medical cooperation and emergency assistance
- Academic and scientific cooperation
- Existing contractual obligations

Clear restoration conditions with quantitative benchmarks ensure the measure serves as commercial policy instrument encouraging compliance with agreement conditionality.

## Character Limit Validation

This ECI must comply with strict character limits for submission:
- **Objectives:** Maximum 1,100 characters (without spaces)
- **Annex:** Maximum 5,000 characters (without spaces)

### Check Character Limits Locally

To verify compliance before submitting:

```bash
# Make script executable (first time only)
chmod +x scripts/check-character-limits.js

# Run the validation script
node scripts/check-character-limits.js
```

### Automated Validation

Character limits are automatically checked on:
- ✅ Pull requests modifying `objectives.md` or `annex.md`
- ✅ Pushes to main branch
- ❌ Builds will fail if limits are exceeded

## How to Contribute

We welcome contributions to improve this ECI. Please follow these contribution procedures:

- Create an [issue](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/issues)
- Create a branch from this issue (from main branch)
- Fetch locally
- Edit files
- Run character limit check
- Commit changes
- Push to repository
- Create [pull request](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/pulls)
- Request review

**Note:** Pull requests that exceed character limits will automatically fail CI checks.

## Join as ECI Organiser

If you wish to join as an ECI organiser, please review [this document](https://github.com/palestine-will-live/eci/blob/main/organisers.md) for requirements and procedures.

## Repository Maintenance

This repository is maintained by [Julien Béranger](https://github.com/julienbrg). For direct communication, you may reach out via:

- [Farcaster](https://warpcast.com/julien-)
- [Element](https://matrix.to/#/@julienbrg:matrix.org)
- [Status](https://status.app/u/iwSACggKBkp1bGllbsOwIwSACggKBkp1bGllbs=#zQ3shmh1sbvE6qrGotuyNQB22XU5jTrZ2HFC8bA56d5kTS2fy)
- [Telegram](https://t.me/julienbrg)
- [Twitter](https://twitter.com/julienbrg)
- [Discord](https://discordapp.com/users/julienbrg)
- [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/julienberanger/)

## License

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
